========,1,preface.
William John Tell is the former rhythm guitarist and backing vocalist for the piano rock band Something Corporate.
After leaving the band in 2004 for a solo career, William Tell was signed as a New Door Records solo artist.
His first solo record, "You Can Hold Me Down" was released on March 13, 2007.
Tell earned a law degree from USC Gould School of Law in 2014 and now works in entertainment law.
========,2,Biography.
William John Tell learned to play guitar from his father (also named William Tell) at a young age and began writing his own songs as well.
He met some of the members Something Corporate through mutual friends and one night when they were all playing at the same nightclub, he was asked to temporarily fill in, as their rhythm guitarist Reuben Hernandez had left to study abroad.
On March 27, 2001, Tell permanently joined the Drive-Thru Records piano rock band Something Corporate.
Tell witnessed the success of Something Corporate over the three years he played with them — through their EP "Audioboxer", released on October 2, 2001, to their full-length albums "Leaving Through the Window" (2002) and "North" (2003), as well as tours with bands like New Found Glory.
During a break between touring for the band, Tell decided that he wanted to pursue his own solo career.
On February 4, 2004 it was announced by the band that Tell had left.
He returned home to California and began writing songs.
His first song, titled "Radio Sound" (which later appeared on his debut album as "Sounds"), was about his mixed emotions dealing with leaving his friends and former band.
Through the course of the next two years, Tell would continue writing and rewriting material, as well as recording.
Brian Ireland, drummer for Something Corporate, would come in to help him during the recording process and also play shows as part of Tell's band.
One of Tell's many performances was the Bamboozle Left festival in Pomona, California on October 14, 2006.
In 2006, Tell was signed to Universal Records' subsidiary New Door Records as a solo artist and began putting the final touches to his debut album.
He collaborated with another Something Corporate member, Andrew McMahon, for the track "Fairfax" on the record.
During January 2007, Tell recorded a practice session for the website Rehearsals.com and on March 13, 2007, Tell released his 10-track solo debut album titled "You Can Hold Me Down" (named after one of the songs).
========,2,Personal life.
In February 2012, Tell began dating former "The Hills" star and fashion designer Lauren Conrad.
They became engaged in October 2013, and married on September 13, 2014 in California.
It was reported on January 1, 2017 that the couple is expecting their first child together.
