========,1,preface.
The Naval Battle of Hyères Islands was fought on 13 July 1795 off the Hyères Islands, a group of islands off the French Mediterranean coast, about east of France's main naval base in the Mediterranean, Toulon.
The battle was fought between the van of a British fleet chasing the French squadron, and the French rear.
The rear-most French ship, "Alcide", surrendered before exploding.
========,2,Context.
After the Battle of Genoa at Cape Noli, and the capture of and , the damaged French fleet retreated to the Hyères Islands.
"Victoire", "Timoléon", and , as well as the frigates "Alceste" and were dispatched to Toulon for repairs, leaving the squadron with only 11 ships of the line.
On 4 April 1795, a squadron of six seventy-fours supported by four frigates, under Rear-admiral Renaudin, arrived from Brest after the Croisière du Grand Hiver.
In May, a mutiny broke out in the Toulon squadron, while Renaudin's ships remained loyal.
Renaudin moored his ships at the entrance of Toulon Roads to cover the harbour against a possible English attack.
Meanwhile, Conventional Deputy Joseph Niou, formerly a naval engineer, restored order by setting the sailors against the English, and having them pledge to "wash their crimes in the blood of the enemies of the Republic".
On 7 June, the French fleet set sail.
========,2,Battle.
In the afternoon of 7 July, made contact.
By the evening, the French were in pursuit, and the next morning, "Agamemnon" signaled the British fleet by means of cannon fire.
At 9:30, the 17-ship French squadron found the 22-ship Royal Navy squadron anchored in Fiorenzo bay, including six three-deckers.
Finding himself outnumbered and outgunned, Martin attempted to avoid battle by escaping to Fréjus bay, with the British giving chase.
In the evening of 12 July, the British squadron received intelligence from two corvettes, "Flêche" and "Cyclops", that the French were south of the Hyères Islands.
Contact was made again the next morning and the chase continued.
The French squadron became becalmed and the rear guard was soon overtaken by the British van, comprising , "Culloden", and "Cumberland".
Without assistance from the main body of the squadron, an artillery duel broke out, battering the rear-most French ship, , damaging "Culloden"s rigging, and almost de-masting "Victory".
Despite the best efforts of her sister ships in the French line to protect her against overwhelming odds, "Alcide" struck her colours at 2:00 pm.
The frigates "Justice" and "Alceste" attempted to take her in tow to safety, but were repelled by gunfire from "Victory".
As the main body of the French squadron prepared to intervene to rescue "Alcide", a fire broke out on her fore-top.
She was consumed by an explosion half an hour later, causing the loss of about 300 of her crew, while 300 survivors were rescued by the British squadron.
After the explosion of "Alcide", the fighting died out, with the French retreating to Toulon and the British retreating to Leghorn, via San-Fiorenzo.
