========,1,preface.
The DeKalb Avenue Line is a public transit line in Brooklyn and Queens, New York City, United States, running mostly along DeKalb Avenue, as well as eastbound on Lafayette Avenue (as part of a one-way pair), between downtown Brooklyn and Ridgewood, Queens.
Originally a streetcar line, it is now the B38 DeKalb/Lafayette Avenues bus route, operated by the New York City Transit Authority.
At its east end, after crossing into Queens, the line turns southeast on Seneca Avenue and ends just short of Myrtle Avenue.
A branch runs northeast on Stanhope Street to Linden Hill Cemetery.
========,2,B38 bus.
The B38 bus route begins at a loop around Borough Hall in Downtown Brooklyn.
It heads east on Fulton Street, splitting onto DeKalb Avenue (westbound) and Lafayette Avenue (eastbound).
After crossing Broadway, eastbound buses return to DeKalb Avenue via Bushwick Avenue.
The route crosses into Ridgewood, Queens and turns southeast on Seneca Avenue; every other bus turns northeast on Stanhope Street to a loop around Linden Hill Cemetery, while the rest continue along Seneca Avenue to just shy of Myrtle Avenue.
Along the way, transfer can be made to the subway at Court Street – Borough Hall (), Jay Street – MetroTech (), DeKalb Avenue (BMT Fourth Avenue and Brighton Lines) (), Classon Avenue (), Kosciuszko Street (), DeKalb Avenue (BMT Canarsie Line) (), and Seneca Avenue ().
========,2,History.
After a legal battle with the Coney Island and Brooklyn Railroad (Smith Street Line), which shared Water Street west of Main Street, and in which it was decided that the CI&B would own two tracks and give the BC&N trackage rights over one, the Brooklyn City and Newtown Rail Road opened the line to the public on January 28, 1862.
The route stretched from Fulton Ferry east to stables at Throop Avenue and a depot at Marcus Garvey Boulevard (then Yates Avenue, later Sumner Avenue).
Tracks were laid in Fulton Street, Front Street, Gold Street, Willoughby Street, University Plaza (then Debevoise Street), and DeKalb Avenue.
The eastbound track, in Water Street and Bridge Street rather than Front Street and Gold Street, was soon opened.
By July, the line was extended northeast on DeKalb Avenue and southeast on Seneca Avenue to the Myrtle Avenue Park in Ridgewood, Queens.
In order to enable the company to avoid the narrow Debevoise Street and a dangerous westbound curve at Debevoise Street and DeKalb Avenue, a law was passed in 1869 to allow a single track in DeKalb Avenue and Gold Street between Debevoise Street and Willoughby Street.
The company laid a single track plus a "siding", but used both for revenue service, rerouting all trains in both directions to the new route in August 1869.
Eastbound trains were moved back to Willoughby Street and Debevoise Street once a single track was built to replace the two; by then, the Hunter's Point and Prospect Park Railroad (Crosstown Line) was also using Willoughby Street.
Starting on May 3, 1871, the Park Avenue Railroad's Vanderbilt Avenue Line shared the tracks between Fulton Ferry and Concord Street.
In March 1872, a law was passed to allow the BC&N to build in DeKalb Avenue west from Debevoise Street to Fulton Street, and use the Brooklyn City Rail Road's trackage in Fulton Street to Fulton Ferry.
After some opposition from the City Railroad, the route was changed in April to turn off on Washington Street after passing City Hall.
Despite objections from Washington Street residents, the new route, using Washington Street north to Front and Water Streets, was opened on September 4, 1872.
The old route continued to be used by short-turn trains to Yates Avenue.
The BC&N stopped using the old route later that decade, but the Vanderbilt Avenue Line continued to use it until 1883, when it built a track in Concord Street west of Bridge Street in order to serve the new Brooklyn Bridge.
The line was leased to the Coney Island and Brooklyn Railroad in 1897.
The De Kalb Avenue and North Beach Railroad (also leased to the Coney Island and Brooklyn) built the branch on Stanhope Street.
Buses were substituted for streetcars on January 30, 1949.
