========,1,preface.
William "Bill' K. Dunn is an American politician and a Republican member of the Tennessee House of Representatives.
Bill Dunn was born July 3, 1961 in the Panama Canal Zone to Paul and Mary Dunn.
Bill Dunn and his wife Stacy have five children and are members of Holy Ghost Catholic Church of Knoxville, Tennessee.
========,2,Biography.
Dunn first earned a Bachelor of Science degree in animal science during 1983 and later completed a Master of Science degree in Extension Education from the University of Tennessee during 1985.
Dunn worked as a federal employee for the U.S.
Agricultural Extension Service as a 4-H agent in Grainger County, Tennessee, for approximately eight years.
Dunn reportedly received several awards for his work in 4-H youth development.
Dunn is a certified arborist and General Manager of Cortese Tree Specialists of Knoxville.
Dunn is now employed by QualPro.
========,2,Tennessee House of Representatives.
Bill Dunn has served as a state representative following his moving back to Knox County as to buy his parent's home during 1993 and later being elected to the 99th Tennessee General Assembly during 1994.
Dunn represents the 16th district of the Fountain City area of Knoxville, which is currently part of Knox County.
Prior to December 2006, Bill Dunn served as the House Republican Leader.
Afterward, he was appointed by his successor as Republican Leader to be the freshman coordinator for the House Republican Caucus.
Currently, Bill Dunn is the Vice Chair of the House Public Transportation and Highways Subcommittee.
He is a member of the House Agriculture Committee, the House Finance Ways and Means Committee, the House Government Operations Committee, the House Calendar and Rules Committee, the House Public Transportation and Highways Subcommittee, and the House Environment Subcommittee.
Dunn authored and was the prime Tennessee House sponsor of marriage amendment against legal gay marriage and also House co-sponsor of the proposed abortion amendment to the Tennessee State Constitution, more commonly referred as Senate Joint Resolution 127, or simply, SJR 127 (the enactment SJR 127 will appear on the November, 2014 Tennessee general election ballot as amendment question 1).
Enactment of the Senate Joint Resolution 127 in various form has been a "primary objective" of Tennessee Right to Life since 2001 and versions of SJR 127 have already passed the Tennessee state Senate four times prior to 2008.
