========,1,preface.
Scatterbox is an American punk rock band from Coeur d'Alene, Idaho.
Formed in 2000, the current lineup includes Tom White (vocals), Scott Rozell (drums), Jared Brown (guitar), Mark Cogburn (guitar), and Ryan White (bass).
They currently are signed with Blackhouse Records of Spokane, Washington.
Scatterbox has released Five full-length albums (including one live record), and three EP's, one of which was a split release with the now-defunct Spokane, Washington band, American Zero (whose members went on to join The Lashes, Moral Crux, and Kay Kay and His Weathered Underground).
========,2,Past members.
Past members include (all guitarists) Dan Stamper (2000–2002), Jared Brown (2002–2005), Chris Copulos (2003–2005), and Sean Nicol (2005–2009).
Dan Stamper played guitar on the first two Scatterbox releases "Run Faster, Jump Higher", and "Lipstick Stains and Shotgun Shells".
Shortly after the release of "Lipstick Stains...", Stamper left the band, and was replaced by (at the time) American Zero and Moral Crux guitarist Jared Brown.
Brown left the band in 2005 to pursue other interests, and Sean Nicol (Intifada, Hellrods) stepped in.
Chris Copulos was added as a second guitarist in 2003 after leaving the band Ghoul.
Copulos left the band in 2006 to move back to his native Chicago, Illinois, and shortly afterwards joined the band Nightcap.
Mark Cogburn joined the band officially on New Year's Day of 2007 and has been noted as a permanent member.
Nicol left the band in 2009 to attend school in Florida and went on to work for Boeing.
And in late 2010, the band added Justin Smith to the lineup.
Jared Brown and Scott Rozell were also members of Lookout!
Records band Moral Crux at a point in time.
Brown left the band in 2008, whereas Rozell departed in 2005, rejoined in 2007, and departed again in early 2009.
Jared Brown rejoined in 2015 after Justin Smith's departure to Seattle, Washington.
========,2,Release history.
The first three Scatterbox releases were self-released on the band's own imprint, Blackhouse Records.
In 2004, the band signed with Clickpop Records, making the newest album "Sudden Movements" the first Scatterbox record to have national and international distribution.
The previous records are, however, harder to find currently.
Scatterbox has appeared on many compilations with bands such as DEK, The Dillinger Escape Plan, Against All Authority, Morrissey, Citizen Fish, MDC, Destruction Made Simple, The Dresden Dolls, and others.
In 2006, the song "Sensitive" from the 2003 album "Infection III" was used on the soundtrack of "" from Troma Entertainment alongside the likes of The Dwarves, The Nihilistics, and Thee Obscene.
The song is actually used in the film as well.
The band's newest studio record, titled "Ritual", was released on October 28th, 2014 via Blackhouse Records/T.F.
Nick Jarvelin handled the production duties (Android Hero, Sledgeback, The Hollowpoints).
The band went on a lengthy hiatus for over a year due to personal reasons before getting back together and moving forward with more recording, touring, and one-off shows.
