========,1,preface.
========,2,Biography.
Eduardo F. Costantini was born in Buenos Aires on September 17, 1946.
He is a Bachelor in Economics graduated from Universidad Católica Argentina (1971) and Master of Arts in Quantitative Economics from the University of East Anglia, England (1975).
========,3,Business career.
He was controller of Penta S.A. (1970-1972) and then its Finance Director (1973-1974).
Between 1975 and 1977 he was a member of the board of Huancayo S.A. During the ‘80s he became a stock-broker and then president of Consultatio Bursátil SA.
Between 1991 and 1994 he was the Vice-president of Banco Francés del Río de la Plata.
In 1991 he also founded Consultatio Asset Management, a company exclusively devoted to managing investment funds mainly in Latin America.
That same year he founded Consultatio SA, a company devoted to the development of large scale real estate projects.
Through this company he would develop Nordelta, the largest and most innovative real estate venture in Argentina.
Built in 1999, Nordelta is located in Tigre, 30 km away from Buenos Aires city center.
It stretches over a surface of 1,700 hectares, it has a population of 35,000 residents and it meets all community needs: two medical centers, five schools, a mall with over 100 stores and five movie theaters, a sports club, an 18-hole golf course designed by Jack Nicklaus, several restaurants, two gas stations and a five-star hotel.
In 2010 Consultatio SA developed Puertos in Escobar, Buenos Aires province, conceived as an ecological urbanization project of 1,400 hectares with its own biological corridor with native species of plants and animals.
With Consultatio SA Costantini has erected many emblematic buildings of Buenos Aires, such as Catalinas Plaza (1995), Alem Plaza (1998), the Grand Bourg Tower and the corporate tower Catalinas Norte, which is currently under construction, placed on the last available site of the Catalinas area in Retiro at Puerto Madero northern entrance .
It will be the most modern and sustainable building in Buenos Aires and the second tallest of the city.
Costantini had carried out real estate projects outside Argentina.
He built Las Garzas complex in Rocha, Uruguay, where he also invested 10 million dollars in the construction of the circular bridge –designed by Rafael Viñoly- that connects the departments of Rocha and Maldonado.
In 2009 he founded at the United States Consultatio Real Estate, responsible of the development of Oceana Key Biscayne – a complex of exclusive apartments and vilas facing the sea- and Oceana Bal Harbour, which will be finished at the end of 2016.
Both projects are placed in Miami and will include art pieces by internationally renowned artists, such as Jeff Koons.
========,3,MALBA Museum.
In 1995 Eduardo Costantini founded the Eduardo F. Costantini Foundation with the purpose of promoting cultural and educational activities in Buenos Aires.
In September 2001 he donated over 220 internationally prestigious Latin American art pieces to open MALBA, Museo de Arte Latinoamericano de Buenos Aires (Museum of Latin American Art of Buenos Aires).
This is a private non-profit institution with a net worth of over 600 works on exhibit by the main modern and contemporary artists of the region, such as Frida Kahlo, Diego Rivera, Tarsila do Amaral, Wifredo Lam, Xul Solar, Joaquín Torres Garcia, Emilio Pettorutti, Cándido Portinari and Antonio Berni.
At present, the museum mixes its permanent collection with temporary exhibits, cinema and literature programs and an important educational activity for children, families, grandparents and disabled people.
Costantini Foundation covers the deficit of the museum -valued in 3 million dollars per year- through funds donated by Costanini.
He decided to donate part of his fortune to charity, as many other millionaires throughout the world had already done.
As art collector and promoter, he is member of the International Advisory Board of São Paulo Art Biennial Foundation.
He also was Chairman Council at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) of New York City, member of the Advisory Committee of the David Rockefeller Center of Latin American Studies at Harvard University and founder member of the Global Philanthropist Circle, Synergos Institute, New York.
========,2,Awards.
In 2008 he received the Konex Award, merit diploma as “Media and service businessman” and the MALBA was recognized as the best cultural entity of the last decade.
In 2011 he was awarded with the Order of Rio Branco (Commander Rank) for his contribution to the dissemination of Brazilian culture.
In 2014 he was distinguished by Endeavor Foundation as ‘Business Role Model’ for his values, track record and commitment to innovation.
That same year he received the award for the best 2014 developer for his Catalinas Norte project in Puerto Madero from the Association of Professors and Directors of Real Estate (APPI).
In April 2016 he was honored with the award of Business Track Record from Ernst & Young Entrepreneur of the Year.
