========,1,preface.
The Coroner's Court of New South Wales is the court in the Australian state of New South Wales where legal proceedings, in the form of an inquest or inquiry, are held and presided over by the State Coroner of New South Wales (or NSW State Coroner), a Deputy State Coroner of New South Wales, or another coroner of the state of New South Wales.
Coroners must be magistrates in the state and sit in branches of the Local Court of New South Wales.
They hold jurisdiction over the remains of a person and have the power to make findings in respect of the cause of death of a person or the cause of any fire in New South Wales.
Generally, there are no appeals from the decision(s) of a coroner; but, there is provision for the Supreme Court of New South Wales to order a fresh inquest or inquiry or to grant prerogative relief in respect of the proceedings.
========,2,History.
The office of coroner in New South Wales derives from the legal framework inherited from the historical origins of the state and, ultimately, the United Kingdom.
Admiral Arthur Phillip, the first governor of the Colony of New South Wales, was authorised by the British monarch to appoint such officials as were necessary for the administration of justice in the colony.
This authority came to Phillip through what is commonly called the "second commission".
One of the offices that he could appoint was that of coroner.
In the early days of the colony, the role of the coroner was often performed by a justice of the peace.
The first inquiry in the nature of a coronial inquest was conducted on 14 December 1788 and was presided over by Augustus Alt, one of the first justices of the peace appointed by Phillip.
The office of the State Coroner of New South Wales was established in 1998, prior to which the coronial system comprised a City Coroner, a Westmead Coroner (which was preceded by Parramatta, Penrith, and Campbelltown Coroners), and coroners in most New South Wales country towns.
After the discovery of asbestos in the file storage area of the Westmead Coroner's Court in 2007, the Westmead Coroner's Court was indefinitely closed.
An investigation was conducted following its closure.
In 2008, the adjacent Westmead Morgue was closed, largely due to budgetary and sustainability concerns.
The City (or State) Coroner's Court, Glebe is located adjacent to the Department of Forensic Medicine, Glebe.
========,2,Structure and jurisdiction.
The Coroner's Court is in the state stream of the Australian court hierarchy, and its operation is defined by state legislation.
Per the , the State Coroner and Deputy State Coroners are appointed to their office by the Governor of New South Wales and must be magistrates in New South Wales.
The Governor may also appoint Coroners and Assistant Coroners, generally, from amongst registrars employed in the New South Wales court system so that coronial services are available in regional areas of New South Wales.
The State Coroner has the function:
***LIST***.
Where a serious criminal offence has been disclosed during the course of an inquest or an inquiry, a coroner may terminate the proceedings and must refer that matter to a Director of Public Prosecutions (State or Commonwealth) for consideration of the initiation, or institution, of criminal proceedings.
All magistrates in New South Wales are "ex officio" coroners by virtue of their appointment as magistrates.
