========,1,preface.
The second season of the American fictional drama television series "ER" first aired on September 21, 1995 and concluded on May 16, 1996.
The second season consists of 22 episodes.
========,2,Plot.
Greene's attempts at balancing his work and family after moving to Milwaukee comes to an abrupt end when his wife is caught cheating on him with a colleague, the divorce becomes final and he starts dating again.
At work, he is promoted, becoming an attending physician.
He locks horns with close friend Dr. Ross, whose reckless professional behavior is called into question by the hospital authorities, and new Chief Resident, Dr. Kerry Weaver.
Ross breaks protocol to treat an HIV-positive child and is about to be fired.
He has already accepted a job at another medical facility when he heroically saves a child, trapped in a sewer in the landmark episode "Hell and High Water".
His heroism creates a media sensation and the hospital reconsiders its decision when Dr. Ross receives an award for outstanding community service.
Later in the season, his father returns, and while attempting to bond his father again walks out on him.
While tracking him down Doug becomes embroiled in a relationship with his father's girlfriend.
Lewis is left holding the baby when her sister, Chloe, skips town, leaving daughter Suzie in Susan's care.
She struggles to find time to care for the child and complete her residency.
She considers having Suzie adopted, but at the last minute decides to keep her.
Just as Susan starts to become attached to the baby, Chloe returns, a changed woman, and a short custody battle ensues.
Eventually, Susan hands Suzie over to Chloe and is left devastated when her sister and her new husband move to Phoenix, taking the baby with them.
Carter, now a fourth-year medical student, starts a relationship with medical student Harper Tracy.
He becomes involved in the treatment of an elderly patient and her husband (played by comic Red Buttons) in order to secure his place in developing a new heart procedure study and a spot in the surgical program.
After the surgery is complete, the woman's condition deteriorates and Carter is overwhelmed by the husband's constant needs.
The woman's subsequent death results in tremendous personal guilt, but Carter still manages to win a place as a surgical intern despite the fierce competition.
Hathaway becomes involved with paramedic Shep.
Their relationship develops quickly and they move in together.
However, things go wrong when Shep's partner, Raul, suffers third degree burns to over 85% of his body during a fire rescue and dies shortly afterward, resulting in emotional crisis and guilt for Shep.
Shep grows volatile and violent, and after he refuses Carol's recommendation that he see a psychiatrist, the couple separate.
At the start of the season, Dr. Benton is in a relationship with Jeanie Boulet.
She ends the relationship in a bid to save her marriage, but soon starts working as a physician assistant at County General.
Benton is frosty towards her and is angry when he finds out about her divorce from her husband.
At the end of the season, Jeanie finds out that she may be HIV-positive after her ex-husband, Al, is diagnosed.
She informs a dismayed Peter and suggests that he too be tested.
Benton also struggles to decide whether to lodge a formal complaint against his mentor Dr. Vucelich, when he discovers irregularities in his research method.
========,2,Production.
First season executive producers John Wells and Michael Crichton reprised their roles.
Wells continued to serve as the series head writer and showrunner.
Lydia Woodward and Mimi Leder returned as co-executive producers.
New producer Carol Flint filled the third co-executive producer position following the departure of Robert Nathan.
Christopher Chulack continued to act as the episodic producer.
Paul Manning and Wendy Spence Rosato also continued in their first season roles as producer and associate producer respectively.
Several changes occurred with the production team mid-season - Leder left the crew, Manning was promoted to supervising producer, and Spence Rosato was promoted to co-producer.
Wells, Woodward, Flint, and Manning continued to regularly write episodes, with each contributing to 4 episodes this season.
First season regular writers Neal Baer and Lance Gentile became story editors for the second season and continued to write episodes.
Baer contributed to two episodes while Gentile continued to act as the series medical consultant and wrote a further episode.
Both were promoted to executive story editors by the close of the season.
First season writer Tracey Stern also returned and contributed a further episode.
First season technical adviser Joe Sachs reprised his role and also made his television writing debut on the second season.
The series other new writers were Belinda Casas Wells and Anne Kenney; Casas Wells contributed to the story of an episode and Kenney wrote a single episode.
Leder and Chulack continued to regularly direct episodes.
Returning first season directors Félix Enríquez Alcalá and Donna Deitch each directed further episodes in the second season.
New directors Thomas Schlamme and Lesli Linka Glatter each contributed two episodes this season.
Crew members Lance Gentile and Director of Photography Richard Thorpe both made their episode directing debuts this season.
Cast member Anthony Edwards also directed his first episode.
Other directors new to the series include Eric Laneuville, Dean Parisot, Whitney Ransick, and Barnet Kellman.
========,2,Reception.
"ER"'s second season proved to be very popular when it became the number 1 show in the US.
Nielsen Viewer ratings and viewers were also exceedingly high, especially for "Hell and High Water".
British magazine "Empire" found the best "ER" episode was the seventh titled "Hell And High Water" where "Doug Ross (George Clooney) saves a young boy from drowning during a flood."
========,2,DVD features.
Region 1 DVDs have subtitles available in English, French and Spanish.
Audio commentaries are available for episodes 1 and 16, with Mimi Leder, editor Randy Jon Morgan, and Laura Innes).
