========,1,preface.
Susan C. Aldridge, Ph.D., is an academic and university administrator, and since September 2013, the senior vice president of Drexel University and president of Drexel Online, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
She is co-author (with Kathleen A. Harvatt) of "Wired for Success: Real-World Solutions for Transforming Higher Education", an applied guide for presidents and senior university administrators.
She was senior fellow with the American Association of State Colleges and Universities (AASCU) from January 2013 to September 2013.
Previously, she served as special advisor to the chancellor of the University System of Maryland, after serving as president of the University of Maryland University College from February 2006 to March 2012.
========,2,Biography.
Susan Aldridge studied at the Colorado Women's College, completing an undergraduate Bachelor of Arts in Sociology/Psychology in 1977, before moving to the University of Colorado at Denver, where she undertook a Masters and then a Doctorate in public administration, graduating in 1991.
During this period she worked for the Denver Regional Council of Governments, initially as a planner and then as a Division Director.
She was also vice president of World Marketing, Inc., a firm engaged in development and management of national and international education programs.
In 1991, Aldridge joined the faculty at the National University of Singapore, where she remained until 1994.
She also lectured on organization, management, and policy at Hong Kong University.
Aldridge joined Troy State University in 1995 as adjunct professor in the graduate programs teaching organization studies, business, health policy and administration, moving on through a series of promotions at the University College there, to become Vice Chancellor in 2001.
Aldridge became the president of University of Maryland University College (UMUC) in February 2006.
Upon her arrival, UMUC enrollments were 84,188, down from the previous year’s headcount at 88,499, and the university’s restricted fund balance stood at $7,997,235, down from a high of $10,885,021 in 2002.
During her six-tenure as president, she boosted the headcount to a record high of 97,001 and the restricted fund balance to $33,316,830, with total university funds reaching an all-time high of $416,552,139.
After resigning as president in March 2012, Aldridge remained on as special advisor to University System of Maryland chancellor William E. "Brit" Kirwin until becoming a Senior Fellow at The American Association of State Colleges and Universities (AASCU) in January, 2013.
While at AASCU, Aldridge researched and co-authored a book with Kathleen A. Harvatt, "Wired for Success: Real-World Solutions for Transforming Higher Education" (published September 2, 2014, American Association of State Colleges and Universities), using first-hand knowledge, extensive research, and case studies from various colleges and universities to showcase and suggest effective new learning and business models for transforming higher education in the face of its many emerging challenges to survival and reform.
The book garnered advance praise from Stephen Joel Trachtenberg, president emeritus of George Washington University, John G. Flores, CEO of the U.S.
Distance Learning Association, John Haeger, president of Northern Arizona University, and George A. Pruitt, president of Thomas Edison State College.
In September 2013, Aldridge was appointed senior vice president for Online Learning at Drexel University and president of Drexel e-Learning, where she is currently leading efforts to develop and evaluate innovative technology-enhanced learning strategies and delivery methods across the university’s online graduate and undergraduate programs.
========,2,Aldridge Resignation.
Aldridge’s resignation from the presidency at UMUC was reportedly prompted by a 92-page confidential complaint filed in the Fall of 2011 with the Maryland Auditor, which resulted in both an audit by the State of Maryland, and an inquiry by the U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.
However, neither the audit nor the Senate inquiry produced any evidence of wrongdoing on Aldridge’s part.
After evaluating ample evidence and testimony about both the quality of UMUC’s education strategies and the validity of its marketing methods the Senate Committee inquiry ended with a single paragraph letter generally applauding the approach being taken by UMUC, both during and after Aldridge’s tenure.
The controversy included extensive press coverage questioning her performance, most notably by "The Washington Post."
