========,1,preface.
Village Academy is a private school in Powell, Ohio, consisting of pre-kindergarten, lower, middle, and upper school.
The school is a nonsectarian, independent, co-ed, international, college preparatory school.
========,2,History.
Village Academy Schools was founded under the Learning Unlimited International Schools system in the fall of 1976 as a year-round preschool and kindergarten.
The original campus was established adjacent to the Ohio State University.
Over the next thirty years, the program expanded to become an independent preparatory school for students in pre-kindergarten through grade twelve.
In 2006, the school was re-branded as Village Academy Schools, which consisted of Village Academy (Kindergarten-Grade 12) and the then-named Village Junior Academy (for pre-kindergarten and young kindergarten).
Village Academy was voted the "#1 Private School in Central Ohio" in the 2010 Suburban News Publications' Reader's Choice Awards, and again in 2011.
In 2011, the pre-kindergarten & young kindergarten programs rejoined the main campus, following the completion of the Griffin Hall building.
In the fall of 1990, the first phase of a campus, Village Academy, opened in Powell, Ohio.
========,2,Extracurricular activities.
Lower School students may choose after school activities such as chess, cooking, art, hands-on science, computer skills, dance, yoga, cheer leading and theater.
Historically, end of the year activities for lower school include trips to the Newport Aquarium and Camp Mary Orton.
All lower school students also participate in a winter musical, a spring production, and other activities such as the science and language fairs, spelling, math and geography bees.
Middle and Upper school students activities include social gatherings, dances, and club activities as well as trips to theater events, museum exhibitions and musical concerts.
Eighth grade students travel to Washington D.C., and seniors plan a trip abroad or to educational destinations in the United States.
Overnight trips to adventure camps, physics days at local amusement parks, laboratory research at Stone Lab on Gibraltar Island are included as co-curricular activities in middle and upper school.
Village Academy is a member of the Ohio High School Athletic Association (OHSAA).
Individual and team sports offered include soccer, tennis, basketball, volleyball, golf, cheerleading, track and field, and cross country.
Athletic programs are available for lower, middle and upper school students.
The school's mascot is the Griffin.
========,2,The Arts Conservatory.
The Arts Conservatory at Village Academy, a structure opened in 2003, incorporates features that represent the architectural history of Powell, Ohio.
The facility houses all of the arts programming at Village Academy, including rehearsal areas for instrumental and vocal music programs, individual practice rooms, woodshop, fashion design workshop, consumer sciences lab, kiln room with a potter's wheel, photography dark room, graphics lab, dance studios, a recording studio, theatre space, and classroom space.
The Arts Conservatory provides training in theater, visual arts, media technology, dance, music, and consumer sciences.
The Village Academy Jazz Band has performed with Arnett Howard, Mark Frye, Gene Walker, and Lee Savory, in addition to performances at locations in Ohio and Florida.
The Village Academy drama department has also held drama productions including: "OTMA", "I Hate Hamlet", "A Christmas Carol", "The Wizard of Oz", "A Midsummer Night's Dream", "Oliver!
", and "The Crucible".
