========,1,preface.
Tessa Ludwick (born October 5, 1988) is a Korean American actress from Apollo Beach, Florida.
She began acting at age five, when she held a lead role in "Allegra's Window", a Nick Jr. children's television program show taped at Universal Studios in Orlando, Florida.
When filming on "Allegra's Window" ended in May 1996, seven-year-old Ludwick went from "Allegra's Window" to a lead role in "Big Bag", a live action television puppet program for preschoolers on the Cartoon Network.
At 8, she landed the role of Kate, an orphan girl in the touring Broadway musical "Annie, the 20th Anniversary."
For the next eight months, she toured the United States and Canada with the musical, during which time Ludwick gave eight performances per week.
In 2003, Ludwick appeared as the character Yumi in "thirteen," an autobiographical drama film based on American film actress Nikki Reed's experiences as a 12 and 13-year-old girl.
In 2004, Ludwick appeared on "Movie Surfers", a Disney Channel mini-show where four teenagers go behind the scenes to report on Walt Disney-related films.
Three years later in June 2007, Ludwick began work on "Teen Witch the Musical", a stage musical based on the 1989 fantasy-comedy film "Teen Witch".
========,2,Early career.
Tessa Ludwick was born October 5, 1988 in Seoul, South Korea.
Ludwick's career began at age two and a half when Ludwick saw a television advertisement about modeling and begged her mother to call the number.
Her modeling led to acting roles.
In the summer of 1994 at age five, Ludwick spent time reading books but took time off to go to Six Flags Over Georgia, a theme park located west of Atlanta, in Austell.
In September of that year, Ludwick attended the first grade at Apollo Beach Elementary.
While attending Apollo Beach Elementary, Ludwick held a lead role in "Allegra's Window", a children's television program shown taped at Universal Studios in Orlando, Florida and shown on U.S. television programming block Nick Jr.
When filming on "Allegra's Window" ended in May 1996, seven-year-old Ludwick began a lead role in "Big Bag", a live action television puppet program for preschoolers that was produced by Sesame Workshop and aired from 1996 to 1998 on the Cartoon Network.
========,2,Television, Broadway, and film.
Ludwick was drawn away in 1997 from "Big Bag" to act in the role of Kate in "Annie, the 20th Anniversary," the Broadway musical on tour revival of the 1977 Broadway theatre production of "Annie".
The "Annie, the 20th Anniversary" tour spanned the United States and Canada from October 1997 through June 1998, during which time Ludwick gave eight performances per week.
The Buffalo News noted that her November 1997 performance as the orphan girl Kate at Buffalo, New York's Shea's Performing Arts Center crafted a personality for the character whose "naturalness [far exceeded] that of the original Broadway cast."
Characterized at that time as "bright, bubbly and [bringing] a sparkle wherever she goes," Ludwick additionally made the honor roll in Hillsborough County's program for gifted students in 1998.
A year later, Ludwick became a spokesperson for Kids with a Cause, a youth organization based in California dedicated to improving the quality of life of children who suffer from poverty, lack of education, or health-related issues.
When she was 13, Ludwick played the character Yumi in "thirteen," a 2003 autobiographical drama film based on American film actress Nikki Reed's experiences as a 12 and 13-year-old girl.
About a year later, Ludwick appeared on "Movie Surfers", a Disney Channel mini-show where four teenagers go behind the scenes to report on Walt Disney-related films.
After this successful career, she starred in Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide as Jennifer Tu.
Tessa has also appeared on a special "Seventh Graders edition" of the game show The Weakest Link.
Where she made it to the final round and won $77,000, beating Jill.
